README.md, before:

Thread-safe message queue for thread synchronization
====================================================

I have recently read about the Go language. I was not really convinced by the concept.
The minimalistic grammar and overall simplicity (as compared to C++ or Java) are nice feature,
but the language still needs optimisation and is sometime tricky.

Nevertheless, I noticed the use of the gracious message queue pattern (called channels in Go) for
thread (called goroutines) synchronization.

This pattern is a FIFO thread-safe message queue suited for thread synchronization.

The pattern of message driven synchronization is of interest because it is intuitive and of a higher level
of abstraction than mutexes and conditions:

- some threads `A` fill the message queue
- some other threads `B` eat up the message queue.

Threads B are gracefully synchronized with threads A.

Therefore, I grabbed my copy of the (excellent) book "Programming with POSIX threads" by Butenhof, where the pattern is mentionned, to
implement it for my old favorite language C.

And here it is.

# Insights of the user interface

## Creation and destruction of a bottle

### Creation

To transport messages of type *T*, just create a message queue with:

`BOTTLE(` *T* `) *`*bottle* ` = BOTTLE_CREATE (` *T* `);`

For instance, to create a message queue *b* for exchanging integers between threads, use:

`BOTTLE (int) *b = BOTTLE_CREATE (int);`

The message queue is a strongly typed (yes, it is a hand-made template container) FIFO queue.

The queue is unbuffered by default.

#### Buffered message queue

If needed, buffered queues can be used in rare cases (for instance to limit the number of thread workers).
To create a buffered message queue, pass its *capacity* as an optional (positive integer) second argument of `BOTTLE_CREATE` :

`BOTTLE(` *T* `) *`*bottle* ` = BOTTLE_CREATE (` *T* `, ` *capacity* `);`

- A *capacity* set to `INFINITE_CAPACITY` defines a buffered queue of inifinite capacity.
- A *capacity* set to `UNBUFFERED` defines an unbuffered queue (default).

*The usage of buffered queues is usually not necessary and should be avoided.*

### Destruction

Once unneeded, the message queue will later be detroyed by `BOTTLE_DESTROY`.

## Exchanging synchronized messages

Sender threads communicate synchronously with receiver threads by exchanging messages through the bottle
(the bottle has a mouth where it can be filled with messages and a tap from where it can be drained.)

- The receivers can receive messages, as long as the bottle is not closed, by calling `BOTTLE_DRAIN (`*bottle*`, `*message*`)`.

    - `BOTTLE_DRAIN` returns 0 if there is no data to receive and the bottle is
       closed (`BOTTLE_CLOSE_AND_WAIT_UNTIL_EMPTY`).
    - If there is data to receive, `BOTTLE_DRAIN` receives a *message* from the bottle (it modifies the value of the second argument *message*) and returns 1.
    - Otherwise (there is no data to receive and the bottle is not closed), `BOTTLE_DRAIN` blocks
        until there is data to receive.

 Therefore `BOTTLE_DRAIN` returns 1 if a message has been sucessfully received from the bottle.

 Please notice that the second argument *message* is of type *T*, and not a pointer to *T*,
 even though it might be modified by the callee (macro magic here).
  
- The senders can send messages by calling `BOTTLE_FILL (`*bottle*`, `*message*`)`, as long as the mouth is open
  and the botlle is not closed.

    - `BOTTLE_FILL` returns 0 immediately without blocking if the bottle is plugged (`BOTTLE_PLUG`).
    - `BOTTLE_FILL` returns 0 immediately without blocking if the bottle is closed (`BOTTLE_CLOSE_AND_WAIT_UNTIL_EMPTY`).
    This most probably indicates an error in the user program as it should ne avoided to close a bottle
    while senders are still using it.
    - Otherwise,

        - If the message queue is unbuffered, `BOTTLE_FILL` blocks until some receiver has received
    the value sent by a previous sucessful call to `BOTTLE_FILL` or `BOTTLE_TRY_FILL`.
        - If it is buffered and the buffer is full, `BOTTLE_FILL` blocks until some receiver has retrieved a value
    (with `BOTTLE_DRAIN` or `BOTTLE_TRY_DRAIN`).
        - Otherwise `BOTTLE_FILL` sends the message in the bottle and returns 1.

  Therefore `BOTTLE_FILL` returns 1 if a message has been sucessfully sent in the bottle.

## Closing communication

When any more messages are sent in the bottle,
receivers must be informed it is not necessary to block and wait for messages anymore.

As the bottle won't be filled any more, we can close the bottle:

The function `BOTTLE_CLOSE_AND_WAIT_UNTIL_EMPTY` will unblock all receivers and wait for the bottle to be empty.
It:

1. prevents any new message from being sent in the bottle (just in case) :
  `BOTTLE_FILL` and `BOTTLE_TRY_FILL` will return 0 immediately (without blocking). 
2. waits for the bottle to be emptied by calls to `BOTTLE_DRAIN` (called by the receivers).
3. asks for any blocked calls to `BOTTLE_DRAIN` (called by the receivers) to stop waiting for food and to finish their job:
  `BOTTLE_DRAIN` will be asked to return immediately with value 0.

This call *must be done in the thread that controls the execution of the feeders*,
after the feeders have finished their work.

Thereafter, once all the receivers are done, the bottle can be destroyed safely with `BOTTLE_DESTROY`.

Note that `BOTTLE_DESTROY` does not call `BOTTLE_CLOSE_AND_WAIT_UNTIL_EMPTY` by default because the user program *should
ensure* that all receivers have returned from calls to `BOTTLE_DRAIN` between `BOTTLE_CLOSE_AND_WAIT_UNTIL_EMPTY`
and `BOTTLE_DESTROY` (usually, waiting for the receivers to finish with a `pthread_join` might suffice),
otherwise, some thread resources might not be released properly (mutexes and conditions).

## Other features

### Unblocking message queue functions

There are also unblocking versions of the filling and drainig functions.

These functions return immediately without blocking. *They are **not** suited for thread synchronization* and are of limited use.

When used, the message queue looses its thread-synchronization feature and
behaves like a simple thread-safe FIFO message queue:

- Receivers can receive messages without blocking with `BOTTLE_TRY_DRAIN (`*bottle*`, `*message*`)`.
`BOTTLE_TRY_DRAIN` returns 0 if the bottle is empty.
Otherwise, it receives a *message* (it modifies the value of the second argument *message*) from the bottle and returns 1.
- Senders can send messages without blocking with `BOTTLE_TRY_FILL (`*bottle*`, `*message*`)`.
`BOTTLE_TRY_FILL` returns 0 if the bottle is plugged, closed or already full.
Otherwise, it sends a *message* in the bottle and returns 1.

Those two functions also return 0 if the bottle is already closed (most probably indicating an error in the user program.)

Notice that the second argument *message* is of type *T*, and not a pointer to *T*,
even though it might be modified by `BOTTLE_TRY_DRAIN` (macro magic here).

### Interrupting communication

Finally, the communication between sender and receiver threads can be stopped and restarted at will if needed.

The mouth of the bottle can be:

- plugged (stopping communication) with `BOTTLE_PLUG`,
- unplugged (to restart communication) with `BOTTLE_UNPLUG`.

# Example

`bottle_example.c` is a complete example of a program (compile with option `-pthread`)
using a synchronized thread-safe FIFO message queue.

**Have fun !**

Commit message:

More consistent API and errno.

README.md, after:

Thread-safe message queue for thread synchronization
====================================================

I have recently read about the Go language. I was not really convinced by the concept.
The minimalistic grammar and overall simplicity (as compared to C++ or Java) are nice feature,
but the language still needs optimisation and is sometime tricky.

Nevertheless, I noticed the use of the gracious message queue pattern (called channels in Go) for
thread (called goroutines) synchronization.

This pattern is a FIFO thread-safe message queue suited for thread synchronization.

The pattern of message driven synchronization is of interest because it is intuitive and of a higher level
of abstraction than mutexes and conditions:

- some threads `A` fill the message queue
- some other threads `B` eat up the message queue.

Threads B are gracefully synchronized with threads A.

Therefore, I grabbed my copy of the (excellent) book "Programming with POSIX threads" by Butenhof, where the pattern is mentionned, to
implement it for my old favorite language C.

And here it is.

# Insights of the user interface

## Creation and destruction of a bottle

### Creation

To transport messages of type *T*, just create a message queue with:

`BOTTLE(` *T* `) *`*bottle* ` = BOTTLE_CREATE (` *T* `);`

For instance, to create a message queue *b* for exchanging integers between threads, use:

`BOTTLE (int) *b = BOTTLE_CREATE (int);`

The message queue is a strongly typed (yes, it is a hand-made template container) FIFO queue.

The queue is unbuffered by default.

#### Buffered message queue

If needed, buffered queues can be used in rare cases (for instance to limit the number of thread workers).
To create a buffered message queue, pass its *capacity* as an optional (positive integer) second argument of `BOTTLE_CREATE` :

`BOTTLE(` *T* `) *`*bottle* ` = BOTTLE_CREATE (` *T* `, ` *capacity* `);`

- A *capacity* set to `INFINITE_CAPACITY` defines a buffered queue of inifinite capacity.
- A *capacity* set to `UNBUFFERED` defines an unbuffered queue (default).

*The usage of buffered queues is usually not necessary and should be avoided.*

### Destruction

Once unneeded, the message queue will later be detroyed by `BOTTLE_DESTROY`.

## Exchanging synchronized messages

Sender threads communicate synchronously with receiver threads by exchanging messages through the bottle
(the bottle has a mouth where it can be filled with messages and a tap from where it can be drained.)

- The receivers can receive messages, as long as the bottle is not closed, by calling `BOTTLE_DRAIN (`*bottle*`, `*message*`)`.

    - `BOTTLE_DRAIN` returns 0 (with `errno` set to `ECONNABORTED`) if there is no data to receive and the bottle was
       closed (by `BOTTLE_CLOSE_AND_WAIT_UNTIL_EMPTY`).
    - If there is data to receive, `BOTTLE_DRAIN` receives a *message* from the bottle
      (it modifies the value of the second argument *message*) and returns 1.
    - Otherwise (there is no data to receive and the bottle is not closed), `BOTTLE_DRAIN` blocks
        until there is data to receive.

 Therefore `BOTTLE_DRAIN` returns 1 if a message has been sucessfully received from the bottle.

 Please notice that the second argument *message* is of type *T*, and not a pointer to *T*,
 even though it might be modified by the callee (macro magic here).
  
- The senders can send messages by calling `BOTTLE_FILL (`*bottle*`, `*message*`)`, as long as the mouth is open
  and the botlle is not closed.

    - `BOTTLE_FILL` returns 0 (with `errno` set to `ECONNABORTED`) in those cases:

        - immediately without blocking if the bottle was closed (by `BOTTLE_CLOSE_AND_WAIT_UNTIL_EMPTY`).
        - after unblocking immediately when the bottle is closed (by `BOTTLE_CLOSE_AND_WAIT_UNTIL_EMPTY`).

    This most probably indicates an error in the user program as it should be avoided to close a bottle
    while senders are still using it.

    - `BOTTLE_FILL` blocks in those cases:

        - If the bottle was plugged (by `BOTTLE_PLUG`).
        - If the message queue is unbuffered, `BOTTLE_FILL` blocks until some receiver has received
    the value sent by a previous sucessful call to `BOTTLE_FILL` or `BOTTLE_TRY_FILL`.
        - If it is buffered and the buffer is full, `BOTTLE_FILL` blocks until some receiver has retrieved a value
    (with `BOTTLE_DRAIN` or `BOTTLE_TRY_DRAIN`).

    - In other cases, `BOTTLE_FILL` sends the message in the bottle and returns 1.

  Therefore `BOTTLE_FILL` returns 1 if a message has been sucessfully sent in the bottle.

## Closing communication

When any more messages are sent in the bottle,
receivers must be informed it is not necessary to block and wait for messages anymore.

As the bottle won't be filled any more, we can close the bottle:

The function `BOTTLE_CLOSE_AND_WAIT_UNTIL_EMPTY` will unblock all receivers and wait for the bottle to be empty.
It:

1. prevents any new message from being sent in the bottle (just in case) :
  `BOTTLE_FILL` and `BOTTLE_TRY_FILL` will return 0 immediately (without blocking). 
2. waits for the bottle to be emptied by calls to `BOTTLE_DRAIN` (called by the receivers).
3. asks for any blocked calls to `BOTTLE_DRAIN` (called by the receivers) to stop waiting for food and to finish their job:
  `BOTTLE_DRAIN` will be asked to return immediately with value 0.

This call *must be done in the thread that controls the execution of the feeders*,
after the feeders have finished their work.

Thereafter, once all the receivers are done, the bottle can be destroyed safely with `BOTTLE_DESTROY`.

Note that `BOTTLE_DESTROY` does not call `BOTTLE_CLOSE_AND_WAIT_UNTIL_EMPTY` by default because the user program *should
ensure* that all receivers have returned from calls to `BOTTLE_DRAIN` between `BOTTLE_CLOSE_AND_WAIT_UNTIL_EMPTY`
and `BOTTLE_DESTROY` (usually, waiting for the receivers to finish with a `pthread_join` might suffice),
otherwise, some thread resources might not be released properly (mutexes and conditions).

## Other features

### Unblocking message queue functions

There are also unblocking versions of the filling and drainig functions.

These functions return immediately without blocking. *They are **not** suited for thread synchronization* and are of limited use.

When used, the message queue looses its thread-synchronization feature and
behaves like a simple thread-safe FIFO message queue:

- Receivers can receive messages without blocking with `BOTTLE_TRY_DRAIN (`*bottle*`, `*message*`)`.

    - `BOTTLE_TRY_DRAIN` returns 0 (with `errno` set to `ECONNABORTED`) if the bottle is empty and closed.
    - `BOTTLE_TRY_DRAIN` returns 0 (with `errno` set to `EWOULDBLOCK`) if the bottle is empty.
    - Otherwise, it receives a *message* (it modifies the value of the second argument *message*)
      from the bottle and returns 1.

- Senders can send messages without blocking with `BOTTLE_TRY_FILL (`*bottle*`, `*message*`)`.

    - `BOTTLE_TRY_FILL` returns 0 if the bottle is closed (with `errno` is set `ECONNABORTED`).
    This most probably indicates an error in the user program as it should be avoided to close a bottle
    while senders are still using it.
    - Otherwise, `BOTTLE_TRY_FILL` returns 0 if the bottle is plugged (with `errno` is set `EWOULDBLOCK`) or already full.
    - Otherwise, it sends a *message* in the bottle and returns 1.

Notice that the second argument *message* is of type *T*, and not a pointer to *T*,
even though it might be modified by `BOTTLE_TRY_DRAIN` (macro magic here).

### Interrupting communication

Finally, the communication between sender and receiver threads can be stopped and restarted at will if needed.

The mouth of the bottle can be:

- plugged (stopping communication) with `BOTTLE_PLUG`,
- unplugged (to restart communication) with `BOTTLE_UNPLUG`.

# Example

`bottle_example.c` is a complete example of a program (compile with option `-pthread`)
using a synchronized thread-safe FIFO message queue.

**Have fun !**
